README.md, before:

# ROS 2 on debian bookworm

This repo provides some simple tooling that may help to define, build, package, and run ROS 2 distributions on debian bookworm. The ideas behind this are explained in more detail [here](./DETAILS.md).

## release.sh

The `release.sh` creates two different debian packages:

`ros2-build-tools_*.deb` - This is a metapackage that depends on a fairly minimal set of debian packages available from the official debian repository that are required to work with ROS 2 packages. This does not require a template and is useful if one wants to develop ROS 2 packages.

`ros2-dist_*.deb` - This is the custom built ROS 2 distribution based on the given template. This installs ROS 2 to the specified location and makes it available in an immutable way to all users.

```bash
Usage: ./release.sh -d | <template_file>

Flags:
  -d: Create ros2-build-tools package only
```

If `release.sh` is invoked with a template as argument and it detects an existing tarball (ros2.tar.gz) it will ask whether it should use the existing tarball or rebuild it. This might be helpful if one only wants to tweak the runtime dependencies or similar, as compilation of a ROS 2 distribution can be a lengthy process.

## build.sh

The `build.sh` builds a custom ROS 2 distribution from a template. It takes a template as input and outputs a tarball (ros2.tar.gz) with a merged install of ROS 2. The tarball can then be used to manually distribute ROS 2 or it can be converted to a installable debian package using `release.sh`. To manually distribute the tarball one may simple copy and extract it on the target system. The tarball should be extracted to the very same location on the system where it was initially built as some parts of ROS 2 include absolute paths.

```bash
Usage: ./build.sh <template_file>
```

## Templates

The template file specifies the ROS 2 packages that should be included in the distribution as well as the build environment one wants to use to build the distribution.

```yaml
build_mode: <native|container>  # native builds everything on the current system, container uses systemd-nspawn (recommended)
container_path: <path>  # path for the nspawn container, e.g. /var/lib/machines/bookworm-ros2-build
install_path: <path>  # path for the merged ROS 2 installation, e.g. /opt/ros2
ros_distro: jazzy  # currently only tested with jazzy
ros_packages: <packages>  # packages to be included in the distribution, e.g. ros_base or "desktop_full navigation2 nav2_bringup slam_toolbox joint_state_broadcaster_gui twist_mux"
ros_repos:
  - repo: <url>  # git URL of further packages one wants to include in the distribution
    branch: <branch>  # branch or tag that should be pulled
skip_keys: <keys>  # packages that should be ignored by colcon when checking dependencies, this is useful if packages of build dependencies have a different name on debian than what colcon assumes, e.g. "fastcdr python3-vcstool rti-connext-dds-6.0.1 urdfdom_headers libogre-dev xtensor"
build_deps: >  # list of build dependencies that should get installed from the original debian repository
  <deps>
rt_deps: >  # list of runtime dependencies that get included in the ros2-dist_*.deb package
  <deps>
```

The included templates one may find in the `templates/` folder may serve as starting point to build fully customized distributions.

Commit message:

Add a small quickstart section to the README

README.md, after:

# ROS 2 on debian bookworm

This repo provides some simple tooling that may help to define, build, package, and run ROS 2 distributions on debian bookworm. The ideas behind this are explained in more detail [here](./DETAILS.md).

## Quickstart

```bash
# Make sure you have yq and systemd-nspawn installed
$ sudo apt install systemd-nspawn yq

# Clone this repo and build the very basic ros2-base distribution
$ git clone https://github.com/markuspetermann/ros2-debian.git && cd ros2-debian/
$ ./release.sh templates/ros2-base.yaml
```

This will build two Debian packages, which you can find in the `buildout/` folder. The `build.sh` script requires superuser privileges to set up and run the container; it will leave your host system untouched, though.

## release.sh

The `release.sh` creates two different debian packages:

`ros2-build-tools_*.deb` - This is a metapackage that depends on a fairly minimal set of debian packages available from the official debian repository that are required to work with ROS 2 packages. This does not require a template and is useful if one wants to develop ROS 2 packages.

`ros2-dist_*.deb` - This is the custom built ROS 2 distribution based on the given template. This installs ROS 2 to the specified location and makes it available in an immutable way to all users.

```bash
Usage: ./release.sh -d | <template_file>

Flags:
  -d: Create ros2-build-tools package only
```

If `release.sh` is invoked with a template as argument and it detects an existing tarball (ros2.tar.gz) it will ask whether it should use the existing tarball or rebuild it. This might be helpful if one only wants to tweak the runtime dependencies or similar, as compilation of a ROS 2 distribution can be a lengthy process.

## build.sh

The `build.sh` builds a custom ROS 2 distribution from a template. It takes a template as input and outputs a tarball (ros2.tar.gz) with a merged install of ROS 2. The tarball can then be used to manually distribute ROS 2 or it can be converted to a installable debian package using `release.sh`. To manually distribute the tarball one may simple copy and extract it on the target system. The tarball should be extracted to the very same location on the system where it was initially built as some parts of ROS 2 include absolute paths.

```bash
Usage: ./build.sh <template_file>
```

## Templates

The template file specifies the ROS 2 packages that should be included in the distribution as well as the build environment one wants to use to build the distribution.

```yaml
build_mode: <native|container>  # native builds everything on the current system, container uses systemd-nspawn (recommended)
container_path: <path>  # path for the nspawn container, e.g. /var/lib/machines/bookworm-ros2-build
install_path: <path>  # path for the merged ROS 2 installation, e.g. /opt/ros2
ros_distro: jazzy  # currently only tested with jazzy
ros_packages: <packages>  # packages to be included in the distribution, e.g. ros_base or "desktop_full navigation2 nav2_bringup slam_toolbox joint_state_broadcaster_gui twist_mux"
ros_repos:
  - repo: <url>  # git URL of further packages one wants to include in the distribution
    branch: <branch>  # branch or tag that should be pulled
skip_keys: <keys>  # packages that should be ignored by colcon when checking dependencies, this is useful if packages of build dependencies have a different name on debian than what colcon assumes, e.g. "fastcdr python3-vcstool rti-connext-dds-6.0.1 urdfdom_headers libogre-dev xtensor"
build_deps: >  # list of build dependencies that should get installed from the original debian repository
  <deps>
rt_deps: >  # list of runtime dependencies that get included in the ros2-dist_*.deb package
  <deps>
```

The included templates one may find in the `templates/` folder may serve as starting point to build fully customized distributions.
